in this section will move on to look at one of excels very powerful but also very little
known features.
And that is the ability to transform an XML document as it's imported into excel.
We've already seen that there are many XML documents which don't have a structure that
lends itself to being imported into Microsoft Excel and when used in such XML documents in
your work flows excess.
Lt starches become very useful because they enable you to transform any XML document into a
structure which Excel can accept on which can be imported into an XML table within an Excel
worksheet.
In order to apply an excess,
lt style she to an XML document so that you can transform it into a different structure.
You need an excess lt process,
sir,
and the good news is there's an excess lt process of built into Microsoft Excel.
The bad news is not a lot of people know it even exists as we've seen.
Most of the XML features within Microsoft Excel are accessed by the developer tab,
but for some peculiar reason,
the excess lt Princess in facility can only be accessed when you use file open and then
double click on an XML file.
If you use any other method of bringing in you,
XML excels excess.
Lt features will not be accessible.
A second requirement for access in the excess lt features within Microsoft Excel is that
you have a process in instruction in the XML document linking it to the excess.
Lt style treat in question even if you have an excess lt style sheet available.
But you haven't got a process.
An instruction in the XML your transforming again these hidden excess lt process in
features within Microsoft,
Excel will not be accessible.
Let's have a look at this process in action.
So in the train involving that's going to 05 used in excess lt style sheets and then number
one Xsl T and Microsoft Excel.
Let's now look at a simple XML document in a style sheet that could be used to transform it
.
So first of all,
that's going to tools dot xml.
And here we've got a simple XML document with tools as the root element tool as the
repeated element and then a series of child elements which contained the actual data.
And at the top of this document,
underneath the XML declaration,
we have a process in instruction link in this document to another document in the same
folder tools that xsl,
which is the style shape that will be used to transform it.
So this process an instruction is the standard,
one that's used to link any XML document to a given style sheet.
First of all,
we have the name of the process and instruction,
which is external style sheet.
And then we've got a couple of attributes type specifying the type of linkage and a dress
specifying the location off the linked file.
Let's now have a look at the style sheet tools that xsl,
and the first thing you'll notice is that it's a standard XML document has XML elements,
and it's a well hold document.
The root element of any xsl style sheet is style sheet,
and it's here that will find the name Space Declaration state in the within.
This document will prefix all elements and attributes which relate to excess.
Lt transformation with the three letters xsl.
Hence,
the root element is written xsl colon style sheet.
Within the style sheet elements we can see to top level elements.
The term top level elements refers to those elements,
which are Children of the style sheet element.
So festival we have outputs,
and here we can specify what type of out but we want to create,
and the three most common methods are XML,
HTML and text.
When you're working with Excel transformations,
you'll always be used in XML,
as the method on the second attribute we have here in dent equals yes means that the output
document will be human readable.
Invent equals no means that it will be system readable but not so easily read by humans.
And then the second top level element is the one that actually is used to do the
transformation.
And that's xsl template.
Each template targets,
a specific note said within the Input XML document,
from its very important that the first template you define is one which targets the entire
document.
This means that you won't get unpredictable results in the output document because you have
a template which handles everything in the input document.
So to define that we use match equals or words slash and that forward slash represents the
root of the XML document,
which,
of course,
is the parent off everything inside the document.
So what this means is that we have the entire document flowing into this template.
And then in this case,
we're saying that the first thing that's gonna happen in terms of output is the creation of
a new route element called products.
So to do that we use in xsl element and then specifying the name of that new element is
products so we can see the import document as a rude called tools.
We're now saying that the output document will instead have a root called products men.
We specify what output we want inside that route.
Element on,
we do this by itemizing each of the note sets that we want to appear in the output document
,
and in this case,
we using xsl apply templates,
which means basically,
look for elements called tour and see if there are any templates within this xsl style
sheet designed for that element,
and do whatever those templates tell you to any part of the input.
XML,
which isn't targeted by xsl,
apply templates,
simply won't be present in the output document.
Obviously,
in our case,
tour is pretty much all there is the second template matches the tool element and then
inside it.
We say that every time we find a tour element will create a new element called product in
the same way as we replace.
Tours with products were now replace in tool with product inside each product element.
We venues xsl copy off to copy the child elements of Tool,
and this is what the asterisk means.
It means all of the child elements and copy off will simply give you exactly what was in
the input.
So these two are being changed.
Tours is becoming products.
Tool is becoming product singular,
but these elements remaining the same.
They simply have a different parent element on a different grandparents element.
So that's a quick overview of what's going on in the template as we go through this section
.
Obviously we'll get plenty of practice on all of these different techniques and components
But let's leave it there for the moment.
And that's now going to Microsoft Excel to look at how the transformation takes place.
So,
as I said,
if you look in developer,
none of these commands will give you the opportunity to apply a style sheet to an XML
document as you import it.
What you have to do is to use file open and access the document that way.
So that's going to number five on number one and open tools that XML So here we can see
that Excel has recognized that this XML has a linked style feet.
So just to reiterate in our XML document,
if this line were present,
this dialog box would never appear.
It only appears when you've got a process in instruction linking the XML document to
starchy.
And if you have a workflow where there are several different options several different
style streets that you might want to use,
you simply put a process in instruction for each of them.
And then you can choose which of them to use to do the transformation.
So obviously we only have one,
so we'll click OK on this warning message always appears,
So we'll just click on yes and ignore it.
And now we're in familiar territory.
This is the standard dialog that appears when you import XML.
So we'll importers accidental table click OK,
and then we have two standard message relating to the creation off a schemer which will in
turn generate an XML map,
so we click OK and our data is imported.
If we move across to develop out and bring up the XML source task pain here,
we can see that the routine school products and the repeating element is called product.
And if we were to export this document,
this is the structure that we now have.
So tours and tour on the input document have been completely overridden,
and we now have products and products.
But I go ahead and click on exports going to number 51 and let's just call these products
and his products,
and inside it we can see the transformed XML document,
so that's a quick overview.
Off the process,
we have an XML document.
It's linked to a style sheet.
We use file open to bring it into excel.
Excel recognizes that there's an attached style sheet,
offers you the option off applying the style sheet.
When you do,
you have an XML map,
which is based on the transformed XML document rather than the original input XML